Aotearoa, kaitiakitanga, mana whenua.
Thank you.
you
coming at three. We know you're deliberating it.
you can hear me. If you could please accept the invitation to be a panelist, to be a panelist that's coming through from the committee. That'd be great.
Great.
it's tasteful.
it's
a panelist or not?
Hi, Hillary, can you hear me?
I can hear you. Can you hear me?
We can. We can. Fantastic. Hey, look, we've got five minutes and it goes pretty quickly, so, and you can take your submission as read. So if you want to leave some time for questions, that would be fantastic.
Awesome. No worries. So first of all, my name's Hillary Pritchard. I'm born and bred in New Zealand. I go back about 13 generations. Our family come from orchards or farming as such.
And environmental has been in our life for a long time. I'm 46 as it is. I've been fishing since I was a little kid. And you can clearly see that our oceans are struggling. I am dumbfounded after the video cameras of deep sea trawling have been released that a country so beautiful as ours and the rules and the regulations that we use in our country are even contemplating letting that into our sea waters.
I think deep sea trawling just destroys everything and anything in that environment. And I don't think it's fair to us or to our next future generations that we allow businesses to come in and do that.
I think a lot in this bill is wrong. And I think none of it is there to protect the oceans or to protect us as New Zealanders.
I don't think allowing fishing companies or commercial fishing companies to be able to pull over to the next year or roll over their fish so that they can catch more of the limit or downsizing the fish is the solution out of this problem.
I think we need to have a look into our oceans more and understand what is going on, how we can do this more sustainable so we can bring in fishing into New Zealand.
It does make a lot of money. It is an extremely fun thing and all of us as humans and New Zealanders should be entitled to be able to do that.
I think one of the other things that I'd like to bring up is that for the long-term effect of trawling we don't actually know what's going to happen.
So I think to allow something like that and just hope that we can correct it in the long-term is just silly.
I am a big believer of doing a no-fish for quite a few years, but I also understand that's unrealistic.
But our oceans are very important and the bottom of the ocean with the sea corals and the environments and the ecosystems is definitely something that we need to protect.
I'm happy with a couple of questions and then I'm quite happy to say my best.
Oh no, if you've still got more to say you go for it.
I have a whole lot more poise.
I think we all understand as well that we've seen deep sea trawling around the world.
We've seen the effect that it can have. The byproducts for instance with sailfish.
Once we increase those all of a sudden we had more being increased to the bio to the bycatchers, which I think as well is a massive problem.
I don't think game fish should be anywhere near commercial fishing or allowed.
And for any New Zealander who's seen any footage of the cameras that is on those trawling nets, I would be shocked that anybody would think that it's a great idea to do in our waters.
I think it's money that we could invest into the fishing company.
We need information that we need to know.
And I think as well that we could amend, like just demolish the bull until we do figure out what is going on in our oceans.
I think a fair part of being New Zealand is being able to just catch a fishing rod and go out and catch a few fish for your kai moana and bring it home.
Reducing the legal size limit of fish in an area to me suggests that that area is possibly outfished.
I don't know how it would make sense to just start fishing smaller ones as I think taking away the babies or the breeders is obviously going to deplete.
There's fish in that area.
I think that's a very scary thing to have in our waters.
I also believe that our oceans themselves being so close to Antarctica and where we are.
I know that we are polluted.
I know that we have all the problems that the rest of the world does as well.
As New Zealanders, I'm kind of hoping that we all do the right thing and realise that we should be protecting our oceans in any form that we can.
And fish, corals, everything that's even at the bottom of the ocean, the microorganisms, the ecosystems, it's all as important as it is out here.
We do enough on our lands with protecting ecosystems.
I think we need to start doing it now in our oceans.
When you can follow people like Matt Watson who really do make a change in New Zealand and make you question what the laws and the rules and what should be going on and you look at somebody who's lived off seafood for a long time and moved to a beautiful place in Northland.
For him to be fine and everybody else to be fine.
You can't catch any crayfish for the next five years so the population can come back.
That's amazing that we can do that as people and as humans.
So let's keep those trawlers out, get them out of our country, change this bill, listen to all the New Zealanders and realise that this is not a smart idea for New Zealand.
Fantastic. Thank you so much for your time, Hilary, and for your submission. We really appreciate it.
Awesome. Have a great day.
You too. Ka kite.
Ka kite.
Okay, Terence, Robert, Harper.
He gets called Robert, obviously.
There we are.
Oh, is it Terence or Robert?
Terence. My official first name is Robert though, but I go as Terence.
Okay, fantastic. Hi, Terence. Hey look, we've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly.
So you want to leave time for questions, then keep your opening statements pretty brief and we have read your submission.
Fantastic. Thank you. So Kia ora and thank you very much for listening to me today. My name is Terence Harper.
I live on the North Shore here in Auckland with my wife and four kids.
And I'm here today because of my love and passion for the ocean and to emphasise to you that the ocean is a resource valued by people of all nationalities and all cultures.
And that it's our collective responsibility to protect it for future generations.
I'm here to express my total opposition to this bill and request that the whole bill is thrown out and not progressed further.
While it's stated to grow the value of the seafood sector exports, I believe we should be a country leading the world in environmental protection,
not one that is going backwards and prioritise a short-term commercial gain at the cost of long-term ecological and economic health.
If enacted, I feel you're destroying our New Zealand ocean for my children and for future generations.
I can be a little bit more specific about some of the items in the bill, deeply concerned about simplifying and making a more responsive management system.
This I feel can lead to changing catch limits really quickly to suit market conditions, but ultimately they will decimate those fish stocks,
which are actually long-term things that need to be sorted. The biological reality of marine generation is long-term.
Also, formally oppose the amendment to revoke minimum size limits for those 10 different fish.
I feel it's scientifically illogical to take smaller fish before they've had a chance and an opportunity to spawn.
I also want to advocate for unifying a standard for catch, for commercial and recreational, to have one rule for commercial,
for example, snapper 25 centimetres, yet for recreational 30 centimetres is in my view illogical,
and we need to allow the time for those fish to breed and replenish in our waters.
I also want to formally oppose the barriers to transparency and justice.
If fishing boats are operating in international waters or New Zealand waters,
they should be allowed to have full public scrutiny of their operations.
If they're doing nothing wrong, they have nothing to hide.
And so if they're wanting to hide what they're doing, it feels to the public that they've got something to hide.
So we should be able to view those cameras at any time via the OIA.
Also allowing more than 20 days to get the evidence together and get a lawyer and stuff to oppose breaches,
I think we need to keep allowing.
I also want to formally oppose allowing bycatch to be dumped at sea, effectively legalising dumping.
90% of our catch is exported for profit overseas, and yet many New Zealanders face food insecurity.
I advocate for a no dumping policy where every fish caught is brought to port.
If it cannot be sold under the quota system, for example, they are too small,
they should be donated to local charities and food banks to feed our own communities.
This would also incentivise commercial fishing to target the right size fish,
because if they're catching a boatload or a hull worth of undersized fish,
they can't sell it, that's bad economically.
So this incentivises them to catch the right size fish.
So my feeling in conclusion, the ocean is a shared resource that must be managed with the vision beyond the next fiscal quarter.
Short-term commercial gains that decimate our stocks will inevitably lead to long-term economic failure.
I urge this committee and to lead New Zealand towards genuine environmental protection,
prioritising local food security over commercial flexibility.
Thank you, and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Heron.
Yeah, thank you. Does anyone have any questions?
Joe, any questions?
No, I think it was a really clear submission.
Yeah, tried to keep it nice and tight, so I know you have a lot to do through today.
Yeah, excellent. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks for hearing me. All the best for the rest of the sessions.
You're welcome.
Hi, Candice. Hi.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
So you've got five minutes. If you want to leave time for questions, that's entirely up to you.
And yeah, this floor is yours. Thank you.
So look, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I strongly oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
And in doing so, I've got four key concerns that, in my view, go to the heart of what this bill represents
and why it shouldn't proceed.
So firstly, I believe the bill is moving against the flow of the global tide.
It represents a clear regression, in my view, in New Zealand's environmental management.
If we look internationally, responsible countries and unions are strengthening protections, not weakening them.
This includes the EU, our Pacific nations, and Australia.
Globally, governments, including this one, have committed to protect at least 30% of the ocean
and to minimise the impacts of fishing on ecosystems through the Global Ocean Treaty.
The common global theme is better protection, more selective fishing methods, and stronger oversight.
New Zealand's built its identity on being clean, green, and environmentally responsible.
But I believe that this bill moves us in the opposite direction.
It reduces scrutiny, it weakens the safeguards,
and it fails to address the real issue of indiscriminate fishing methods.
So I believe that the bill's not just out of step with international best practice.
It's actually out of step with what we say we stand for as New Zealanders.
Secondly, in restricting access to information and onboard camera footage,
the bill removes public scrutiny. Now that's a backward step.
Transparency is fundamental to public trust.
It will mean that there's no meaningful accountability.
We know from experience that transparency and monitoring changes behaviour.
If we remove that transparency and public scrutiny,
I believe it will undermine compliance and create an even greater sense of mistrust
in our commercial fishing industry.
Thirdly, the proposal to allow the capture and retention of undersized fish
is a significant step away from sustainability.
The purpose of size limits is straightforward, to ensure that fish can reach maturity
and breed before they are caught.
By allowing the landing and capture and sale of previously discarded fish,
you will only encourage the catching of undersized or non-target species.
It will increase the by-catch.
We now know that the EU's own landing policy has not driven the behavioural change
that they had hoped for.
So our regulatory focus should be on reducing the by-catch, not increasing it.
Fourthly and in my view most importantly, this bill fails to address the real issue,
the non-selective and discriminate fishing methods.
Large scale methods such as bottom trawling and other non-selective techniques
capture juvenile fish before they breed.
They result in significant by-catch of non-target species
and they damage our marine habitats that are essential for sustaining fish populations.
But this bill does nothing to address that.
Instead it makes it easier to deal with the consequences of indiscriminate fishing.
And that's the wrong focus.
I've seen over the course of my lifetime the significant depletion of fish stocks
in the Hauraki Gulf and elsewhere.
And my view is that this bill will exacerbate that.
We now know more than ever the importance of protecting our marine ecosystem
to ensure the health of our planet.
This bill is not based on sustainability objectives.
It's not based on sustainability objectives or on the protections that are required,
which should be the focus of modern day fisheries reform.
It's designed purely to increase profitability for a few.
And it does appear manifestly corrupt.
So I'm calling for a different approach.
Rather than weakening safeguards, I believe that we should be strengthening
monitoring and transparency.
We should be maintaining protections that allow fish to reproduce.
And most importantly, to undertake an inquiry into how the commercial sector
can transition towards a more selective fishing method.
And I think we can look to Australia for that.
So in closing, this bill is not just a technical reform.
It's a signal about what we value.
Do we value short-term profit for a few or long-term sustainability that will benefit all?
So I'm urging the committee to reject the bill in its current form
and instead to pursue reforms that genuinely protect our oceans, our fisheries,
and the interests of our future generations.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your comprehensive and heartfelt summation, Candice.
I appreciate your time today.
You're in Winsdale?
Winsley.
Oh, Winsley. Winsdale.
Sorry.
Oh, good. So you can hear me and see me?
Yes, Erin. Hi.
Hi.
So yeah, I mean, I filled out the submission.
I used to be a fisheries observer.
So I've got quite a good first-hand knowledge of New Zealand commercial fisheries.
And it was common knowledge when I was an observer that boats that had observers
caught more birds and discarded more fish
than boats without observers.
And it's common knowledge.
But why is that?
Because fishermen are incentivized to not necessarily tell the truth all the time.
And so a big problem I have with this bill is the camera footage,
I think needs to be available to the public.
Because the fishers need to be held accountable.
So that's the main issue I have.
And the other problem I have is with the undersized fish,
I think potentially, you know, they're just creating a market for these fish,
maybe even incentivized catching them.
So I think that would be a backward step.
So yeah, those are the main two issues I have.
Yeah, and if you have any questions.
I do, Sose.
Yes, thank you, Joe. Joe likes to hear the question.
Thank you, Erin.
So you just said boats that had observers caught more birds
and those that didn't have observers didn't.
How does that, can you just explain how that works, please?
Well, they weren't being reported.
But unless an observer was on board, the fishers went reporting seabird bycatch.
And that's what happens.
So you said that those then.
So can I just check so that you...
So the ones that did have observers, as I heard you say, caught more birds.
Or did you mean those that had observers didn't catch more birds?
No, no, the ones that had observers reported a higher rate of catching seabirds.
Okay, and the reason for that is because the observers were reporting them.
The boats that didn't have observers.
Yeah, okay.
So, yeah, thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Thanks, Erin.
Miles Anderson has a question as well.
Thanks for your submission, Erin.
About the market, you're talking about the market for undersized fish.
Could you expand on that a bit?
Well, I mean, I think cakefish, for example.
I mean, illegal cakefish is, you know, for a recreational person, 75 centimetres,
which is quite a big fish.
So you could easily...
A 50 or 60 centimetre cakefish would be quite a nice size fish for the table.
So, yeah, you could easily create a market.
I mean, if you go somewhere like Japan where these fish are actually found,
that's a common size.
Yep.
You'll see in a second.
Other species that you could think of as well.
They farm snapper too.
So, you know, I could easily imagine a smaller fish like that.
You don't have to...
You know, especially with a lot of immigrants in New Zealand,
they cook fish differently.
They'll often just cook at home.
So I think if they're fishing...
Fish are meant to be fishing to make money.
That's their job.
So any way that they can make as much money as they can,
they will.
And we shouldn't be surprised,
but we need to make sure that
they don't...
Their interests aren't quite ahead of the interests of the New Zealand public.
Thank you.
So I've just got to kind of a suck on that.
So would you be more inclined to support that part of the legislation
if they were still required to bring in the undersized catch
but they weren't allowed to sell it?
But still, it came in so it was quite against their quota
but they didn't have a right to sell it.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thanks very much for your time, Erin.
That was really helpful.
OK, thank you.
Take care.
OK, bye.
Mia Elliott.
We're nearly ready for you, Matthew.
No.
You've been very patient.
Meaning a lot.
She seems interesting.
It's just to turn on the video...
Oh, yes, we can hear you.
And if you want to turn your camera on, you're welcome to.
Oh, there, yeah.
There we go.
Fantastic.
Hi.
Right, you've got five minutes.
The floor is yours.
Cool, my name is Mia.
I'm James Mayor, I'm from Taupanoia Te A College, I'm year 12.
I strongly oppose this bill.
There's a lot of things I've been thinking about with it,
and it's just so many things that aren't quite right.
There's just...
I might not be experienced as everyone else who's come into the table,
and I know you've already sat through many amazing people's voices
and hearing their viewpoints,
what I do have is a voice, and I have another viewpoint.
I'm a generation that is dealing with this,
and I have to grow up with these issues that have been put into our world.
And the next generation, Aura Angatahi, they have to deal with this.
They have to grow up with what we're putting in,
what we're putting in place.
And little kids, they believe what we tell them.
They don't have that wrong or right thing yet.
The bill is being promoted as a solution to fish wastage,
but it could actually increase the amount of wastage in commercial fisheries.
Critics believe this bill prioritizes the commercial fishing interest
over the long-term health of marine ecosystems.
If we let this bill go through, we're actually not letting
anyone get a say in.
So as soon as the bill goes through, no one gets a say.
The minister can increase the catchment as much as he want
without even consulting anyone,
which in turn is going to strip our oceans of their natural wonders.
This bill introduces multi-year catch limits,
which changes fish populations,
produces environmental pressures,
and also it will crumple our natural ecosystems' way of life.
And we have with all our bottom trawling that's happening
and that if we let this bill go through,
we're allowing bottom trawling to continue
and strip the bottoms of our oceans away.
We're saying that we're going to allow undersized fish to be caught,
which is pretty bad.
And even if we are letting go of these sharks
and raise that we throw off our boats, they're still dying.
We're actually pulling up heaps of coral,
heaps of their natural environments
as we're doing this bottom trawling
and then we're just leaving waste in our wake.
We're saying, oh yes, we'll know we're getting money from it.
Well, that's not the problem.
You need, I don't know, this bill makes me feel like
it's profit over people.
I don't see much human input.
I don't see much thought into what we think about it.
Think about the mouldy values where we would fish from the seas,
explore them, not exploit them.
Our Amawana, they're a gift.
They're not something we can use to get money.
That's not how it works.
We're also wondering if we stop, if we use this bill,
then we're allowing us people, the people of New Zealand
to have no view into what's actually happening
because you're banning us from being able to see existing camera footage.
So if something's going on, something's wrong,
and it's videoed, we can't see that.
We can't argue about it.
We don't get a say.
You're moving the environmental safeguards,
weakening the environments just to build this law.
And you need to, I feel this bill needs to consider the future generations.
And I understand that the fisheries, I understand that we need fish.
We need to be able to provide fish to other countries
and things for our external exports.
But surely we can find a way where we can balance our,
only take as much as we can give.
Only having your slice of the cake,
not taking the whole cake and wanting to go.
Thank you so much, Mia.
And thank you for your time and for your,
and having, being a voice-over here,
and for participating in the democratic process.
It's awesome.
So well done to you and a shout out to the students
at Taupo Nui Te A College.
Thank you.
Rex Chapman.
Oh, hi, Rex.
Just need to take, turn your sound and mute yourself.
I'm trying to do that now.
Can we do it for him?
I was sent and propped to do it.
All right.
Got you.
We're all good.
Okay.
My name's, oh, sorry.
You go.
My name's Rex Chapman.
I'm the captain of the Seedwood fishing vessel,
Takao to Deepwater Trawler 82 metre.
I'm actually at sea at the moment.
So I've got you on my phone.
I've been a professional fisherman fishing for 40 years.
And I support this deal.
And some of the reasons why.
I fish as an employee for Seedwood.
So, and I fish efficiently and with a strong focus
on sustainability and utilizing our precious resources
carefully with the lightest footprint possible.
And you'll find most professional fishermen of my level
have, you know, we've got skin in the game and we want that.
You know, the New Zealand fisheries heavily regulated
and well managed.
I've fished in lots of other countries in the world.
New Zealand is second to none in that speak.
I heard someone talking about, we could learn lessons
from Australia.
I fish in Australia and they're fairly comparable,
you know, two systems over.
And one thing that was different over there was
they're allowed to discard quoted species,
which I thought was a backward step when I first
went over there until I was talking to the observer
one day and he says, so in New Zealand,
if you've got a life quoted species that bycatch,
you're not allowed to put it back in the water again
and release it alive.
I said, no, we're not, you know.
So, you know, and that sort of made me think a bit
a bit more about that.
I hear the argument that science is done by the fishing industry
and is not independent and could be manipulated.
I've done a lot of scientific voyages in Macrae
with Siro, Niwa, Deepwater Group,
independent scientists and observers.
Myself and the crews have put in many hours
under stock assessment, mitigation methods
and many types of collection of data and biological samples
and filming behavior underwater to try and mitigate bycatch.
We put in hours, we live and breathe it out here.
We're also involved in programs of releasing species alive
with tags to check survival rates of release fish.
We're best place to do the science
because we're out living on the ocean 12 months of the year
and see it daily.
Why would we manipulate data when it affects the future
of our future and our children's future?
It's our livelihood.
It's absurd to even think of it.
Myself and my colleagues, we get quite sick and tired
of all the people portraying the industry
as greedy dishonest people who wish to destroy the ocean
and its biodiversity.
Why would we want to destroy our livelihood
and the future of all the young people coming through?
We protect it.
We see things that no one else sees
and we're best place to look at stuff.
In reality, we're a lot of hard-working, honest professionals
who spend half our lives living on the sea
providing good protein to feed the world.
We're heavily invested in the ocean
and its sustainability for our future
and our families' futures.
Most of us are also recreational fishers as well.
A lot of our opponents pray on emotion
and to make wild statements
and catastrophize about the state of the ocean
with no science or evidence.
As I've got older, I look more for one thing, the truth.
Good decisions can only be made with good information
and good science, whether in my job at sea
or at a government level.
On the other side, decisions made with emotion
and bad information lead to bad outcomes
and have unintended consequences to people.
I think cameras on vessels are a good thing.
I don't think the public should be available
to see the footage.
I don't think it should be the public need to be involved
in the prosecution or the sentiment against fishermen,
but MPI should get the footage
and if there's anything wrong, they should prosecute the people.
And as it is now,
we have observers most of the time on the boat.
I heard the observer before saying about boats
without observers catch less birds
and ones that don't, and ones with them catch less.
But in saying that, there's no skin off my nose
to report everything I catch.
And it's law.
So you don't break the law by catching a bird,
but you break the law by not reporting it.
And it doesn't affect me in any value of monetary
or doesn't have any effect on me, the company.
They encourage me to, well, I'd be in trouble
if I didn't report it.
And it's not what we do. We want to do that.
From my point of view, I'd rather release any species
other than my target species alive
if I could back in the water.
And that sort of goes a bit with the minimum size limits.
I sort of see it from the side.
I see what that guy was saying before
if it couldn't be sold.
I don't think people will ever target small fish
that I see of the deep water
also is different to the inshore.
So the stuff we catch, any small fish,
if it's dead, it should be kept.
If it's alive, it should be kept.
My view is it should be put back in the water
if it's likely to survive.
There's no point putting dead stuff.
There's nothing of value for me
in having small fish on board.
If I don't get paid for it, I'd get towed off.
I'd say, what are you doing there?
And it's not what I do.
It's morally wrong.
I wouldn't target small fish.
That's good.
I hope you guys fully understand
what the changes will mean
for good modern fisheries management.
And it's a bit more dynamic
than being able to change things
at a more timely rate.
Yeah, that's about all.
I hear a lot of stuff about
the depletion of fisheries and recreational.
As I say, we're outside
the recreational eye.
We're deep water, so we're not really involved in that.
But from where I live in Nelson,
the snapper fishing has never been so good in my lifetime.
I've lived there all my life.
It's incredible.
And what I see is our stocks are well managed.
OK, we're nearly at time, Rex,
but Miles Anderson has got a quick question.
So I'll just pass you over to Miles.
Thanks, Rex.
I just would like your thoughts.
So there's been a lot of criticism
of bottom trawling by a number of submitters.
What are your thoughts?
My thoughts are there's a lot of misinformation
on the bottom trawling.
And it's 3% or something of the bottom.
We fish traditional areas that we've always fished.
The boat on my now,
we predominantly mid-water fishing most of the year.
So a bit lighter footprint, but we still do bottom trawl.
And areas where I fish for probably 20 or 30 years myself.
So we're not dredging up loads of coral
and killing biodiversity.
And the other thing I hear is that we're the only nation
in the high seas that still bottom trawls.
Well, the high seas is outside New Zealand's 200-mile limit.
It's not inside New Zealand's 200-mile limit.
So it's a wee bit of a play on words that one.
And there's not, I don't think there's many New Zealand boats
that even fish outside the 200-mile limit anyway.
Bottom trawlers now.
And I think there's a lot of countries,
you know, there's Korea and Russia and China
and there's a lot of people still doing that, you know.
Our practices are really good in New Zealand.
And like I say, I've been all over the world
and seen other people's practices.
And yeah, what we do here is very professional.
Thank you very much, Rex.
And thank you for dialing in from the sea.
That's very cool.
Thank you.
Okay, fine.
Matthew.
Yes.
You're up.
Yeah, have a seat.
You can come up too.
Look at these two chairs.
I think that's probably a good enough time
to know how it works.
What's your name?
Charlie.
Hi Charlie.
Hi.
Thank you everyone.
My name's Matthew Breach and I'm here to speak against this bill.
First of all, I was elected by Ngati Porou,
by Ngati Porou,
on. I also come here on behalf of all New Zealanders and all those who love the sea and get the
kai to feed our families and communities. I come here as a recreational fisherman of over 40 years
and the son and the grandson of two passionate recreational fishermen before me. I'm a primary
school teacher and I've always brought the passion of my and love of the sea into my classrooms.
I'm a trainee skipper and a charter skipper and the owner of a hunting and fishing tourism
business as well. And lastly I come here as the father of a daughter who loves Tangaroa and just
as much as her dad. You fit all into a day. Yeah I'm a busy man. The fish in the Kaimauano of this
country have always been public resource and it's one of the most precious Tonga we have.
The fisheries of New Zealand are in crisis in my whole time. I've seen Scotland fisheries
collapse, crayfish populations dwindle and once famous offshore reefs become devoid of the
deagle to species that made them famous in the first place. Over generations we've seen this
decline for as long as I can remember. Other recreational groups and environmental activists
have pleaded to successive governments and sadly the response is usually to cut the recreational
catch from six crayfish to three from 10 power to five from 10 snapper to seven. Each time this happens
we recreational fishermen grumble begrudgingly but we eventually succumb because we want to do our
part. What has been the ultimate kick in the guts is that over that same time period
we've seen commercial catch limits either stay the same or increase. My specific parts of my
rudest submission that I'd like to speak to today are as follows. I would like to see access to
free or affordable fish to all of our population. I'm not anti-commercial some of my best friends
are commercial fishermen but they are hamstrung by the low per kilo rate that they receive
from the people who own the quota. I have a friend who is a commercial fisherman and in his time
he was paid 50 cents per kilo for tarakihi and then somehow that turns into 40 dollars a kilo
in the supermarket. I think there's a mismatch there that we need to look at. Fish dumping I think
that's the probably biggest problem we have. The stupidity of the whole scenario is beyond me
and it's not currently just the undersized fish that are getting dumped. I have first-hand
accounts from fishermen who are putting species like yellowfin tuna back overboard because
they're not the right shape, size or weight. Bottom trawling has to stop. It's too destructive
the research is clear and the rest of the world has woken up to that. My recommendations is to
feed New Zealand first and put profits last. As mentioned before this resource is all of ours
and we all have to have a contribution on how it's managed. I believe the ditching of the
quota system needs to happen and we reinvent the wheel. Rotating non-commercial take areas
five years per region will be with compensation for local fishermen. Full transparency from big
companies on methods, practices, introducing cameras. The benefits is honouring Te Tiriti for
our Māori population. Health benefits for New Zealanders with access to healthy food at a
reasonable price. Increased biomass means sustainable commercial methods can happen
and families will participate more. You want to get your kid off an iPad, give them a fishing rod
or a snorkel and a mask. I heard the fisheries minister speak this week that we need a bill of
some sorts and on that I couldn't agree more. The only way to remedy the state of our ocean
is through full public consultation of all sectors and a raft of legislative changes that
aren't based on a 40 year old system not fit for purpose anymore. To the minister of fishies,
kia tupato, your ancestors are watching and so are your moko. How about you actually put New Zealand
first, feed our own people and be the kaitiaki you're supposed to be. I'd like to finish with the
o'hake of Te Warepāuri, a local chief, i muri nei kia pai, taku taonga Māori, taonga pākiaa.
Kia tāi akei te Hareru o te reo, kia hau te i te reinga after I've gone. Be good to my Māori and my
Pākehā people. Let the thunder of your voice reach me in the spirit land. In this context we are
future focused, are we future focused in our decision making? Are we considering the treasures of
both Māori and non-Māori and are we being good ancestors for the next generation? Let this
be the touchstone for your mahi here today. Te nā koutou, te nā koutou, te nā koutou.
Nā mahi. Thank you. I've just got one quick question. Thank you very much for your submission. It was
awesome. You talked about your mate that was getting kachin te rekihi for 50 cents a kilo.
So was that a commercial arrangement? Yes. So that was a deal that he made with the person
that owned the quota. That's how it is for most people. So do you think that that's not really a
legislative issue? But do you think the quota system needs to change? That people that hold
the quota should be using the boater to fish? I think there needs to be a way to get the
food from the fisherman to the people without all the middle people clipping the ticket so that
everyone can get affordable seafood. The health benefits to the country would be massive. I
don't know, you guys have crutched the numbers and stuff like that. But can you imagine the
obesity and the diabetes stuff if you can get reasonably priced seafood? So your mate owns
the boat but the person that owns the quota doesn't own the boat? He ended up giving up
because it wasn't sustainable. So he did own the boat, he caught the fish but the value for
the fish he was getting was making it non-profitable. And so it ends up all just going back to big
companies. Yeah, it's really interesting. All right, thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Nice to meet you, Charlie.
Nice to meet you.
Oh hi, sorry Trish. It's all right. How are you? I'm very good.
Tell the team my name is Trish Ray and I am here because I'm concerned about our kids and our Mokopuna
will not enjoy the abundance from the ocean that past generations have enjoyed if this
bill progresses. I want to tell you about three fisheries not only abstract but three actual
stocks in New Zealand waters that have been managed using the same methods that this bill
proposes to enshrine in law and I want to tell you what's happened to them.
The first one is Taurakihe 1 that's on the north-east coast for years catch per unit of effort
which is CPUE said the stock was manageable catch rates were holding and the model was okay.
Meanwhile independent trawl surveys the surveys that count actual fish rather than measure how
easily they are caught were showing a population in serious decline. Scientists were raising the
alarm but the CPUE signal said carry on and the stock did not carry on and it's now fall into
a level that will likely trigger an urgent review this year and catch reductions that should have
come years ago may now only come this year. The window for easy recovery has closed for that fishery.
Then we talk about Rock Lobster crayfish on the north-east coast again on the commission of
fisheries in New Zealand and international panel of independent scientists reviewed our
management procedures in 2024 and explicitly warned against relying on CPUE as the primary
indicator of abundance. The warning was documented it was on the record and management procedures
continued anyway the cray one stop has since collapsed there is now a genuine scientific uncertainty
whether it can recover to commercially viable levels within a generation.
Then we have Blue Nose a deep water stop slow to mature slow to reproduce and slow to recover
from pressure the kind of species for which the precautionary principle was invented the CPUE data
tracked well for an extended period the stock as independent surveys have shown did not catch
limits were set too high for too long and a slow reproducing species has paid the price
and the currency that it can barely afford years of future productivity that's just three stocks
using the same method and the same failure CPUE does not count fish it measures how easily fish
are caught so when a fleet becomes more experienced uses better technology and becomes more skilled
at finding the remaining fish in the shrinking population CPUE stays stable yet the stock continues
to fall scientists call this hyper stability it's not a new concept and it's not disputed
it's documented in international literature and it has now been documented in our own waters
with our own species and their own supposedly world leading quota management system
and the bill proposes to make CPUE based management procedures the centerpiece of New Zealand fisheries
management it proposes to automate catch limit decisions based on an indicator with a proven
tendency to miss stock collapses and it proposes to put the rules governing those procedures
into ministerial instruments below the level of parliamentary scrutiny with a 20-day window
for legal challenge so we've got taraki one we've got crayfish one and we've got blue nose one
these are not predictions they are on record and the committee is being asked to legislate the same
approach that produced these outcomes and i'm asking you here today don't do that the evidence is
already in the cost is already being paid by the fish and by every New Zealander who depends on
healthy seas we need to kill the bill thank you for your time um i'd have to say trish that was an
exceptional submission thank you very much and it was really informative and um very passionate and
heartfelt thank you does anyone she answered all yeah miles did have a question at one stage
but you answered it you answered it in the next couple of sentences um thank you very much thank you
kaki say
yeah
last there's anyone
kodi
Thanks.
You want a Cody?
Oh, you just need to take your self off mute.
Perfect.
Very nice. Great.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
You've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly.
So the floor is yours.
OK.
My name is Cody Hunn.
A recreational fisherman official in the Harrogate Gulf.
A boat owner for 16 years.
And I've been out in the water since I could crawl.
I was taught to fish by my father
and I'm desperately trying to pass those lessons on to my twin boys.
Over these 16 years, I've seen a heartbreaking decline.
10 years ago, I could shoot out after work for a quackfish
in the Ringitoto or Monahee channels
and easily bring home a feed for my family.
Today.
A whole weekend of effort often ends in a struggle
to find even one legal fish.
The biblical numbers of snapper the minister talks about are a fantasy.
They certainly don't match the reality of my sounder or my chili bin.
I'm being locked out of 12 new high protection areas
in the name of conservation.
I can accept that, but I cannot accept the blatant double standard
that allows commercial ring netting and trawling
to continue right next to or even within these zones.
It is a gut punch as a father to tell him
he can't take his kids fishing for a car while in these areas.
Well, a commercial boat is allowed to come up
and sweep up tons in the same spot.
If it's a nursery, it should be a nursery for everyone.
No exceptions, no loopholes
and absolutely no special treatment for industry.
The bill reduces transparency by making it hard to see to see camera footage.
If the industry has nothing to hide, why lock the doors?
I know what happens when no one's watching.
Growing up, our family came to Waibukau.
I vividly remember seeing commercial boats
on the horizon near the Heninchigan Islands.
The next day, the beach was covered in dead snapper.
We spent the afternoon on the water
in a trail of dead fish floating across the Breen Bay.
The old timers at the camp told me it was standard practice
and that if they catch a fresher batch, they dump the old stuff.
That scared me.
It showed me how careless and wasteful these businesses can be.
I'm asking this committee to kill the bill, at the very least,
remove the loopholes that allow commercial mates to keep stripping the HPAs
while families like mine are restricted to out of fish grounds.
Don't let our hair and hair turns be traded for commercial profit.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Trotty.
Do you have any questions?
Got a question from Miles Anderson.
Sure.
Thanks for your submission, Katie.
A couple of submitters talked about the difference
between inshore and deep sea fisheries.
Have you any insights into the difference of those?
Like I'm not a professional fisherman.
I'm recreational.
Yeah.
So from my point of view, it's just like I've seen the decline
and like I just want to be able to go out and get a feed
and take my family out and have fun on the water.
The HPAs and stuff, I think are a great idea.
But like I say, it has to be for everyone.
You can't say that I can't fish there and then go get a big net
and we'll trawl through there and take it all of us.
I'm just about being fair and
you know, I leave it up to the professionals to to discuss what
you know, what sort of quota limits and things like that.
And obviously, right for the industry.
Thanks, Cody.
Awesome. Thank you very much for taking the time to talk to us.
That's awesome.
Thank you very much.
See you, Cody.
Right.
So you have any.